Numbers, Facts and Trends Shaping Your World

- Newsletters
- Press
- My Account
- Donate
- Contacted By Us?

Read our research on:

- Artificial Intelligence
- Donald Trump
- Middle East

[Return to Home]

Search

[]

- Research Topics []

  []
  Topics

  Politics & Policy

  International Affairs

  Immigration & Migration

  Race & Ethnicity

  Religion

  Age & Generations

  Gender & LGBTQ

  Family & Relationships

  Economy & Work

  Science

  Internet & Technology

  News Habits & Media

  Methodological Research

  Full Topic List

  Regions & Countries

  Asia & the Pacific

  Europe & Russia

  Latin America

  Middle East & North Africa

  North America

  Sub-Saharan Africa

  Multiple Regions / Worldwide

  Formats

  Feature

  Fact Sheet

  Video

  Data Essay

- Publications

- Our Methods

- Short Reads

- Tools & Datasets

- Experts

- About Us

-  []

  []
  - Research Topics
  - Publications
  - Short Reads
  - Tools & Datasets
  - About Pew Research Center
  - Newsletters
  - Press
  - My Account
  - Contacted By Us?

[Return to Home]

-  []

  []
  Search
  []

  Read Our Research On:

  - Artificial Intelligence
  - Donald Trump
  - Middle East

Home

>

Research Topics

Writing Survey Questions

Perhaps the most important part of the survey process is the creation of
questions that accurately measure the opinions, experiences and
behaviors of the public. Accurate random sampling will be wasted if the
information gathered is built on a shaky foundation of ambiguous or
biased questions. Creating good measures involves both writing good
questions and organizing them to form the questionnaire.

Questionnaire design is a multistage process that requires attention to
many details at once. Designing the questionnaire is complicated because
surveys can ask about topics in varying degrees of detail, questions can
be asked in different ways, and questions asked earlier in a survey may
influence how people respond to later questions. Researchers are also
often interested in measuring change over time and therefore must be
attentive to how opinions or behaviors have been measured in prior
surveys.

Surveyors may conduct pilot tests or focus groups in the early stages of
questionnaire development in order to better understand how people think
about an issue or comprehend a question. Pretesting a survey is an
essential step in the questionnaire design process to evaluate how
people respond to the overall questionnaire and specific questions,
especially when questions are being introduced for the first time.

For many years, surveyors approached questionnaire design as an art, but
substantial research over the past forty years has demonstrated that
there is a lot of science involved in crafting a good survey
questionnaire. Here, we discuss the pitfalls and best practices of
designing questionnaires.

Question development

There are several steps involved in developing a survey questionnaire.
The first is identifying what topics will be covered in the survey. For
Pew Research Center surveys, this involves thinking about what is
happening in our nation and the world and what will be relevant to the
public, policymakers and the media. We also track opinion on a variety
of issues over time so we often ensure that we update these trends on a
regular basis to better understand whether people’s opinions are
changing.

At Pew Research Center, questionnaire development is a collaborative and
iterative process where staff meet to discuss drafts of the
questionnaire several times over the course of its development. We
frequently test new survey questions ahead of time through qualitative
research methods such as focus groups, cognitive interviews, pretesting
(often using an online, opt-in sample), or a combination of these
approaches. Researchers use insights from this testing to refine
questions before they are asked in a production survey, such as on the
ATP.

Measuring change over time

Many surveyors want to track changes over time in people’s attitudes,
opinions and behaviors. To measure change, questions are asked at two or
more points in time. A cross-sectional design surveys different people
in the same population at multiple points in time. A panel, such as the
ATP, surveys the same people over time. However, it is common for the
set of people in survey panels to change over time as new panelists are
added and some prior panelists drop out. Many of the questions in Pew
Research Center surveys have been asked in prior polls. Asking the same
questions at different points in time allows us to report on changes in
the overall views of the general public (or a subset of the public, such
as registered voters, men or Black Americans), or what we call “trending
the data”.

When measuring change over time, it is important to use the same
question wording and to be sensitive to where the question is asked in
the questionnaire to maintain a similar context as when the question was
asked previously (see question wording and question order for further
information). All of our survey reports include a topline questionnaire
that provides the exact question wording and sequencing, along with
results from the current survey and previous surveys in which we asked
the question.

The Center’s transition from conducting U.S. surveys by live telephone
interviewing to an online panel (around 2014 to 2020) complicated some
opinion trends, but not others. Opinion trends that ask about sensitive
topics (e.g., personal finances or attending religious services) or that
elicited volunteered answers (e.g., “neither” or “don’t know”) over the
phone tended to show larger differences than other trends when shifting
from phone polls to the online ATP. The Center adopted several
strategies for coping with changes to data trends that may be related to
this change in methodology. If there is evidence suggesting that a
change in a trend stems from switching from phone to online measurement,
Center reports flag that possibility for readers to try to head off
confusion or erroneous conclusions.

Open- and closed-ended questions

One of the most significant decisions that can affect how people answer
questions is whether the question is posed as an open-ended question,
where respondents provide a response in their own words, or a
closed-ended question, where they are asked to choose from a list of
answer choices.

For example, in a poll conducted after the 2008 presidential election,
people responded very differently to two versions of the question: “What
one issue mattered most to you in deciding how you voted for president?”
One was closed-ended and the other open-ended. In the closed-ended
version, respondents were provided five options and could volunteer an
option not on the list.

When explicitly offered the economy as a response, more than half of
respondents (58%) chose this answer; only 35% of those who responded to
the open-ended version volunteered the economy. Moreover, among those
asked the closed-ended version, fewer than one-in-ten (8%) provided a
response other than the five they were read. By contrast, fully 43% of
those asked the open-ended version provided a response not listed in the
closed-ended version of the question. All of the other issues were
chosen at least slightly more often when explicitly offered in the
closed-ended version than in the open-ended version. (Also see “High
Marks for the Campaign, a High Bar for Obama” for more information.)

[]

Researchers will sometimes conduct a pilot study using open-ended
questions to discover which answers are most common. They will then
develop closed-ended questions based off that pilot study that include
the most common responses as answer choices. In this way, the questions
may better reflect what the public is thinking, how they view a
particular issue, or bring certain issues to light that the researchers
may not have been aware of.

When asking closed-ended questions, the choice of options provided, how
each option is described, the number of response options offered, and
the order in which options are read can all influence how people
respond. One example of the impact of how categories are defined can be
found in a Pew Research Center poll conducted in January 2002. When half
of the sample was asked whether it was “more important for President
Bush to focus on domestic policy or foreign policy,” 52% chose domestic
policy while only 34% said foreign policy. When the category “foreign
policy” was narrowed to a specific aspect – “the war on terrorism” – far
more people chose it; only 33% chose domestic policy while 52% chose the
war on terrorism.

In most circumstances, the number of answer choices should be kept to a
relatively small number – just four or perhaps five at most – especially
in telephone surveys. Psychological research indicates that people have
a hard time keeping more than this number of choices in mind at one
time. When the question is asking about an objective fact and/or
demographics, such as the religious affiliation of the respondent, more
categories can be used. In fact, they are encouraged to ensure
inclusivity. For example, Pew Research Center’s standard religion
questions include more than 12 different categories, beginning with the
most common affiliations (Protestant and Catholic). Most respondents
have no trouble with this question because they can expect to see their
religious group within that list in a self-administered survey.

In addition to the number and choice of response options offered, the
order of answer categories can influence how people respond to
closed-ended questions. Research suggests that in telephone surveys
respondents more frequently choose items heard later in a list (a
“recency effect”), and in self-administered surveys, they tend to choose
items at the top of the list (a “primacy” effect).

Because of concerns about the effects of category order on responses to
closed-ended questions, many sets of response options in Pew Research
Center’s surveys are programmed to be randomized to ensure that the
options are not asked in the same order for each respondent. Rotating or
randomizing means that questions or items in a list are not asked in the
same order to each respondent. Answers to questions are sometimes
affected by questions that precede them. By presenting questions in a
different order to each respondent, we ensure that each question gets
asked in the same context as every other question the same number of
times (e.g., first, last or any position in between). This does not
eliminate the potential impact of previous questions on the current
question, but it does ensure that this bias is spread randomly across
all of the questions or items in the list. For instance, in the example
discussed above about what issue mattered most in people’s vote, the
order of the five issues in the closed-ended version of the question was
randomized so that no one issue appeared early or late in the list for
all respondents. Randomization of response items does not eliminate
order effects, but it does ensure that this type of bias is spread
randomly.

Questions with ordinal response categories – those with an underlying
order (e.g., excellent, good, only fair, poor OR very favorable, mostly
favorable, mostly unfavorable, very unfavorable) – are generally not
randomized because the order of the categories conveys important
information to help respondents answer the question. Generally, these
types of scales should be presented in order so respondents can easily
place their responses along the continuum, but the order can be reversed
for some respondents. For example, in one of Pew Research Center’s
questions about abortion, half of the sample is asked whether abortion
should be “legal in all cases, legal in most cases, illegal in most
cases, illegal in all cases,” while the other half of the sample is
asked the same question with the response categories read in reverse
order, starting with “illegal in all cases.” Again, reversing the order
does not eliminate the recency effect but distributes it randomly across
the population.

Question wording

The choice of words and phrases in a question is critical in expressing
the meaning and intent of the question to the respondent and ensuring
that all respondents interpret the question the same way. Even small
wording differences can substantially affect the answers people provide.

Se produjo un error.

No se puede ejecutar JavaScript.

[View more Methods 101 Videos]

An example of a wording difference that had a significant impact on
responses comes from a January 2003 Pew Research Center survey. When
people were asked whether they would “favor or oppose taking military
action in Iraq to end Saddam Hussein’s rule,” 68% said they favored
military action while 25% said they opposed military action. However,
when asked whether they would “favor or oppose taking military action in
Iraq to end Saddam Hussein’s rule even if it meant that U.S. forces
might suffer thousands of casualties,” responses were dramatically
different; only 43% said they favored military action, while 48% said
they opposed it. The introduction of U.S. casualties altered the context
of the question and influenced whether people favored or opposed
military action in Iraq.

There has been a substantial amount of research to gauge the impact of
different ways of asking questions and how to minimize differences in
the way respondents interpret what is being asked. The issues related to
question wording are more numerous than can be treated adequately in
this short space, but below are a few of the important things to
consider:

First, it is important to ask questions that are clear and specific and
that each respondent will be able to answer. If a question is
open-ended, it should be evident to respondents that they can answer in
their own words and what type of response they should provide (an issue
or problem, a month, number of days, etc.). Closed-ended questions
should include all reasonable responses (i.e., the list of options is
exhaustive) and the response categories should not overlap (i.e.,
response options should be mutually exclusive). Further, it is important
to discern when it is best to use forced-choice close-ended questions
(often denoted with a radio button in online surveys) versus
“select-all-that-apply” lists (or check-all boxes). A 2019 Center study
found that forced-choice questions tend to yield more accurate
responses, especially for sensitive questions.  Based on that research,
the Center generally avoids using select-all-that-apply questions.

It is also important to ask only one question at a time. Questions that
ask respondents to evaluate more than one concept (known as
double-barreled questions) – such as “How much confidence do you have in
President Obama to handle domestic and foreign policy?” – are difficult
for respondents to answer and often lead to responses that are difficult
to interpret. In this example, it would be more effective to ask two
separate questions, one about domestic policy and another about foreign
policy.

In general, questions that use simple and concrete language are more
easily understood by respondents. It is especially important to consider
the education level of the survey population when thinking about how
easy it will be for respondents to interpret and answer a question.
Double negatives (e.g., do you favor or oppose not allowing gays and
lesbians to legally marry) or unfamiliar abbreviations or jargon (e.g.,
ANWR instead of Arctic National Wildlife Refuge) can result in
respondent confusion and should be avoided.

Similarly, it is important to consider whether certain words may be
viewed as biased or potentially offensive to some respondents, as well
as the emotional reaction that some words may provoke. For example, in a
2005 Pew Research Center survey, 51% of respondents said they favored
“making it legal for doctors to give terminally ill patients the means
to end their lives,” but only 44% said they favored “making it legal for
doctors to assist terminally ill patients in committing suicide.”
Although both versions of the question are asking about the same thing,
the reaction of respondents was different. In another example,
respondents have reacted differently to questions using the word
“welfare” as opposed to the more generic “assistance to the poor.”
Several experiments have shown that there is much greater public support
for expanding “assistance to the poor” than for expanding “welfare.”

We often write two versions of a question and ask half of the survey
sample one version of the question and the other half the second
version. Thus, we say we have two forms of the questionnaire.
Respondents are assigned randomly to receive either form, so we can
assume that the two groups of respondents are essentially identical. On
questions where two versions are used, significant differences in the
answers between the two forms tell us that the difference is a result of
the way we worded the two versions.

[]

One of the most common formats used in survey questions is the
“agree-disagree” format. In this type of question, respondents are asked
whether they agree or disagree with a particular statement. Research has
shown that, compared with the better educated and better informed, less
educated and less informed respondents have a greater tendency to agree
with such statements. This is sometimes called an “acquiescence bias”
(since some kinds of respondents are more likely to acquiesce to the
assertion than are others). This behavior is even more pronounced when
there’s an interviewer present, rather than when the survey is
self-administered. A better practice is to offer respondents a choice
between alternative statements. A Pew Research Center experiment with
one of its routinely asked values questions illustrates the difference
that question format can make. Not only does the forced choice format
yield a very different result overall from the agree-disagree format,
but the pattern of answers between respondents with more or less formal
education also tends to be very different.

One other challenge in developing questionnaires is what is called
“social desirability bias.” People have a natural tendency to want to be
accepted and liked, and this may lead people to provide inaccurate
answers to questions that deal with sensitive subjects. Research has
shown that respondents understate alcohol and drug use, tax evasion and
racial bias. They also may overstate church attendance, charitable
contributions and the likelihood that they will vote in an election.
Researchers attempt to account for this potential bias in crafting
questions about these topics. For instance, when Pew Research Center
surveys ask about past voting behavior, it is important to note that
circumstances may have prevented the respondent from voting: “In the
2012 presidential election between Barack Obama and Mitt Romney, did
things come up that kept you from voting, or did you happen to vote?”
The choice of response options can also make it easier for people to be
honest. For example, a question about church attendance might include
three of six response options that indicate infrequent attendance.
Research has also shown that social desirability bias can be greater
when an interviewer is present (e.g., telephone and face-to-face
surveys) than when respondents complete the survey themselves (e.g.,
paper and web surveys).

Lastly, because slight modifications in question wording can affect
responses, identical question wording should be used when the intention
is to compare results to those from earlier surveys. Similarly, because
question wording and responses can vary based on the mode used to survey
respondents, researchers should carefully evaluate the likely effects on
trend measurements if a different survey mode will be used to assess
change in opinion over time.

Question order

Once the survey questions are developed, particular attention should be
paid to how they are ordered in the questionnaire. Surveyors must be
attentive to how questions early in a questionnaire may have unintended
effects on how respondents answer subsequent questions. Researchers have
demonstrated that the order in which questions are asked can influence
how people respond; earlier questions can unintentionally provide
context for the questions that follow (these effects are called “order
effects”).

One kind of order effect can be seen in responses to open-ended
questions. Pew Research Center surveys generally ask open-ended
questions about national problems, opinions about leaders and similar
topics near the beginning of the questionnaire. If closed-ended
questions that relate to the topic are placed before the open-ended
question, respondents are much more likely to mention concepts or
considerations raised in those earlier questions when responding to the
open-ended question.

For closed-ended opinion questions, there are two main types of order
effects: contrast effects ( where the order results in greater
differences in responses), and assimilation effects (where responses are
more similar as a result of their order).

[]

An example of a contrast effect can be seen in a Pew Research Center
poll conducted in October 2003, a dozen years before same-sex marriage
was legalized in the U.S. That poll found that people were more likely
to favor allowing gays and lesbians to enter into legal agreements that
give them the same rights as married couples when this question was
asked after one about whether they favored or opposed allowing gays and
lesbians to marry (45% favored legal agreements when asked after the
marriage question, but 37% favored legal agreements without the
immediate preceding context of a question about same-sex marriage).
Responses to the question about same-sex marriage, meanwhile, were not
significantly affected by its placement before or after the legal
agreements question.

[]

Another experiment embedded in a December 2008 Pew Research Center poll
also resulted in a contrast effect. When people were asked “All in all,
are you satisfied or dissatisfied with the way things are going in this
country today?” immediately after having been asked “Do you approve or
disapprove of the way George W. Bush is handling his job as president?”;
88% said they were dissatisfied, compared with only 78% without the
context of the prior question.

Responses to presidential approval remained relatively unchanged whether
national satisfaction was asked before or after it. A similar finding
occurred in December 2004 when both satisfaction and presidential
approval were much higher (57% were dissatisfied when Bush approval was
asked first vs. 51% when general satisfaction was asked first).

Several studies also have shown that asking a more specific question
before a more general question (e.g., asking about happiness with one’s
marriage before asking about one’s overall happiness) can result in a
contrast effect. Although some exceptions have been found, people tend
to avoid redundancy by excluding the more specific question from the
general rating.

Assimilation effects occur when responses to two questions are more
consistent or closer together because of their placement in the
questionnaire. We found an example of an assimilation effect in a Pew
Research Center poll conducted in November 2008 when we asked whether
Republican leaders should work with Obama or stand up to him on
important issues and whether Democratic leaders should work with
Republican leaders or stand up to them on important issues. People were
more likely to say that Republican leaders should work with Obama when
the question was preceded by the one asking what Democratic leaders
should do in working with Republican leaders (81% vs. 66%). However,
when people were first asked about Republican leaders working with
Obama, fewer said that Democratic leaders should work with Republican
leaders (71% vs. 82%).

The order questions are asked is of particular importance when tracking
trends over time. As a result, care should be taken to ensure that the
context is similar each time a question is asked. Modifying the context
of the question could call into question any observed changes over time
(see measuring change over time for more information).

A questionnaire, like a conversation, should be grouped by topic and
unfold in a logical order. It is often helpful to begin the survey with
simple questions that respondents will find interesting and engaging.
Throughout the survey, an effort should be made to keep the survey
interesting and not overburden respondents with several difficult
questions right after one another. Demographic questions such as income,
education or age should not be asked near the beginning of a survey
unless they are needed to determine eligibility for the survey or for
routing respondents through particular sections of the questionnaire.
Even then, it is best to precede such items with more interesting and
engaging questions. One virtue of survey panels like the ATP is that
demographic questions usually only need to be asked once a year, not in
each survey.

U.S. Surveys

- About Our U.S. Surveys
- The American Trends Panel
- Writing Survey Questions
- Polling Policy Statement
- Frequently Asked Questions
- The National Public Opinion Reference Survey (NPORS)

Other Research Methods

- International Surveys
- Data Science
- Demographic Analysis

[Return to Home]

901 E St. NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20004
USA
(+1) 202-419-4300

Research Topics

Politics & Policy

International Affairs

Immigration & Migration

Race & Ethnicity

Religion

Age & Generations

Gender & LGBTQ

Family & Relationships

Economy & Work

Science

Internet & Technology

News Habits & Media

Methodological Research

Follow Us

- []Email Newsletters
- []YouTube
- []Instagram
- []Facebook
- []LinkedIn
- []X
- []Bluesky
- []Threads
- []RSS Feed

ABOUT PEW RESEARCH CENTER Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan,
nonadvocacy fact tank that informs the public about the issues,
attitudes and trends shaping the world. It does not take policy
positions. The Center conducts public opinion polling, demographic
research, computational social science research and other data-driven
research. Pew Research Center is a subsidiary of The Pew Charitable
Trusts, its primary funder.

© 2026 Pew Research Center

- About
- Terms & Conditions
- Privacy Policy
- Cookie Policy
- Feedback
- Careers
- Contact Us

[] []

Privacy Notice

We use cookies and other technologies to help improve your experience;
some are necessary for the site to work, and some are optional. Learn
more in our privacy policy.

Essential Cookies

These cookies are required for the website to function and cannot be
switched off.

Analytics Cookies

These cookies are used to collect information about how you use our
website.

Marketing Cookies

These cookies are used to track your activity and show you personalized
content.

Meta (Facebook) Pixel

Pinterest Tag

LinkedIn Insight Tag

Reddit Pixel

Preferences

These cookies allow the website to remember choices you make.

Accept All Cookies

Accept only necessary cookies

Cookie Settings

Save Preferences
